.TH WICKEDD 8 "13 February 2010
.SH NAME
wickedd \- network management daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "wickedd [" options "]
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBwickedd\fP
provides a service for managing network interfaces. It parses the
network configuration from the system's network configuration files,
and monitor the system's current network configuration by retrieving
it from the kernel via netlink, sysfs and other interfaces.
.PP
The service can be accessed via an \fBAF_LOCAL\fP
socket, using a RESTful interface. A command line utility,
\fBwicked\fP(8), can be used to access the service from shell scripts.
.\" ----------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-\-config " filename
By default, the daemon reads its configuration from
\fB/etc/wicked/config.xml\fP. The \fB\-\-config\fP
options allows you to specify a different configuration file.
.TP
.BI "\-\-debug " facility
Enable debugging for \fIfacility\fP. By specifying \fBmost\fP
as the debug facility, most useful debug options will be enabled.
You can also specify several facilities, separated by commas.
Prepending a minus will turn off the specified facility. For
instance, to enable all debugging facilities except reporting of
events, use \fB"all,-events"\fP.
.IP
The list of available facilities can be obtained using
\fB"\-\-debug help"\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-foreground\fP
Tell the daemon to not background itself at startup.
.TP
\fB\-\-no-fork\fP
Do not fork when processing an incoming REST call. Mostly useful when
you wish to debug the server in gdb.
.TP
\fB\-\-no-recovery\fP
By default, \fBwickedd\fP will try to restart address configuration
daemons such as the DHCP client when it finds unexpired leases for a
given interface. By specifying this option, this behavior is suppressed.
.\" ----------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/wicked/config.xml
specifies the global configuration of the daemon. This file may pull
in additional configuration data from the same directory.
.TP
.B /var/run/wicked.pid
Location of the PID file written by the daemon when backgrounding
itself.
Can be changed in the configuration file.
.TP
.B /var/run/wicked.sock
Path of the \fBAF_LOCAL\fP socket through which clients can
communicate with the server.
Can be changed in the configuration file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBwicked\fP(8), \fBwicked\fP(7), \fBwicked\fP(5).
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Olaf Kirch <okir@suse.de>

